hello everyone welcome to the first
lecture in the course theory of
computation in this lecture I will be
giving you an introduction to the course
theory of computation where we shall see
what this course is all about what can
we study from this course and what this
course has to offer all right so let's
get started so what is theory of
computation this theory of comput ation
is one of the most fundamental courses
of computer science this course is one
of the most fundamental as well as
abstract courses of computer science
which every computer scientist and
Engineers must
know this course is not going to help
you write programs or build a computer
as such but it will help you understand
how people have thought about computer
science as a science in the past 50
years okay so what does this mean and
what is it really about
so this subject is mainly about what
kind of things can you really compute
mechanically how fast can you do it and
how much space does it take to do
so okay so we know that in computer
science there are certain kind of
problems that a computer or a machine
can solve and also there are certain
kind of problems or things that a
machine cannot do or certain kind of
things that a computer cannot solve so
we shall be seeing all these kind of
things in this subject okay so we talked
about how fast and how much space does
it take to do so so let us just leave
these two points for a while and let us
just focus on about what kind of things
can you really compute
mechanically so to make this point clear
let us take a simple example so let's
say I want to design a machine that
accepts all binary strings that end in
zero I want to design a machine that
accepts all
binary
strings that end in zero so my machine
that I designed should accept all binary
strings that end in zero and should
reject all other strings that does not
end in zero okay so let me take an
example string here let's say 11 1 0 1 0
1 1 0 so this is my example string that
I have
here okay now now what I want to do is I
should check whether this string is
accepted by my machine so as a human
being how would I perform this task as a
human being I would just look at the
last digit and if I see that it is zero
I say yes I accept it or if I find that
it is equal to one I say no I reject it
so how would a machine do this a machine
would scan the last digit and if it
finds that it is equal to Zer it says
yes it is accepted
or if it finds that it is equal to one
it says no and it rejects it why because
our machine is supposed to accept all
binary strings that end in
zero okay so that was fairly a very
simple example now let us take another
example in this example I want to design
a machine that accepts all valid Java
code it
accepts all
valid Java
codes okay so what should my machine do
my machine should check the binary
equivalent of my codes when I write a
code in Java it should check the binary
equivalent of this codes and from this
binary equivalent it should tell whether
this came from
a valid piece of java code or it is
invalid okay so my question is is it
possible to design this kind of a
system the answer to this is absolutely
yes we can and the best example I can
give for this
is
compilers when we write a piece of code
into our compilers let's say that I'm
writing a piece of java code so I write
a piece of java code into my compiler
and when I compile that program if if I
have written that program correctly
without any mistakes the compiler
compiles that program and runs it
because it is valid on the other hand if
you have made some mistakes in that code
or if you have written something wrongly
then the compiler tells you that there
is an error and it does not run the
program because it is
invalid all right so we can we see that
it is very much possible to design this
kind of a system and from this example I
I think we got a slight hint that the
whole of compiler design it came from
this subject theory of
computation okay so I hope that was
clear now let's take another example now
in this example I want to design another
system
that that
accepts
all
valid Java
codes
and never
goes
into
Infinite loop I assume you know what is
the meaning of infinite Loop okay
so I want a machine that accepts all
valid Java codes and do not go into
Infinite Loop so is it possible to
design this kind of a system so from
this uh previous example we have found
that it is possible to design a system
that accepts all valid Java codes this
part is possible it's fine but we have
one more condition here and never goes
into Infinite Loop can I design a system
that never allows my code to go into an
infinite
Loop the answer to this is no I can
never design a system that
performs this
task okay so even if you design it you
would either get the wrong output or it
could run forever and give you no output
at all so this kind of a machine that
performs this kind of a task cannot be
designed okay so this third example has
given us an idea about what kind of
things can we not compute
mechanically okay I hope that was
clear so what is this subject all about
this Sub in this subject what we usually
do is that we have a we have a system or
a machine we design a machine and
suppose this is a machine and then we
send an input to this machine and then
the machine thinks about this input
based on some formula or based on some
rules and it either says yes and it
accepts the input or it rejects the
input so this is what we are going to
basically do in this subject we are
going to design systems or machines
which can take certain kind of inputs
and this machine will be based on some
rules and it should either accept the
input or reject the input so this will
be the thing that we'll be doing don't
worry even if it is a little unclear
right now when we take uh other examples
and when we start from the very Basics
from the following lectures it will all
become very
clear okay now now let us see what are
the layers or the levels in this subject
that we have to go through for that I
will show you a diagram over here so
here I have a small diagram showing the
layers or levels in this subject so in
the first layer we have
FSM so what is
FSM FSM stands for finite State
machine FSM stands
for
finite state
machine this FSM that is finite State
machine it is one of the simplest model
of computation it is the simplest model
of computation and it has a very very
limited amount of memory and it can
perform very lowlevel computations and
calculations okay this is the basic
building block of this subject this is
the first thing that we will be learning
so keep in mind FSM it will be starting
starting with it in the following
lectures from the very Basics so don't
worry even if you don't understand these
terms now we will make make it clear as
we go further and then the next layer we
have is
CFL CFL CFL stands
for
context
free
language context free language CFL
stands for context free language and CFL
is a little more powerful than FSM and
it can perform some more higher level of
computations as compared to finite State
machines okay uh and one thing to
remember here this language over here
this language here does not mean a
programming language okay when we in
computer science when we come across the
term language we often think oh this
means a programming language but no in
this subject here in this context free
language this language actually mean
means
a set of
strings a set of strings is what is
known as language it'll become clear
when we uh explain it further in the
following lectures so don't worry about
it and in the next layer we have
something known as touring machine
touring machine is a uh machine that can
perform high level computations and
calculations it was designed by alen
touring in 1940 and it is much much more
powerful as compared to context free
language and final State
machines okay and in the next layer we
have this undecidable this is labeled as
undecidable and why is that it is
because the problems that cannot be
solved mechanically those kind of
problems it falls under this undecidable
layer like for example above uh some
time back we saw an example about a
problem that could not be solved
mechanically so those kind of problems
that fall they fall under this
undecidable layer okay so these are the
layers that we have to go through and we
will be starting with finite seit
machines FSM in the next uh following
lectures so we'll be start with the very
Basics so don't worry even if you don't
understand this terms that we used here
it will become very clear as we start
from the very Basics from the next
lecture onwards so thank you for
[Music]
watching